SOURCE: https://phhp.ufl.edu/admissions/living-in-gainesville/

Admissions
Overview
Moving to a new city is exciting, and we’d like to show just some of the things Gainesville, FL has to offer!
Housing
Whether you prefer the convenience of living on campus or the flexibility of off-campus options, the University of Florida provides a range of resources to help you find the ideal place to call home.
On campus housing resources
Off campus Housing resources
Transportation
The Gainesville bus system, RTS, connects the UF campus with the rest of Gainesville. Bus fare is free with your Gator-1 ID. You can download the app the TransLoc app, or
find RTS maps, routes and a bus tracker here
Students who choose to park on campus must have a decal 7:30 am – 4:30 pm Monday – Friday. To purchase a decal, visit
Transportation and Parking Services
Gainesville has been ranked the number one most bicycle-friendly city in the state of Florida! There are plenty of bike lanes and bike racks around campus and the surrounding areas. Bike theft can be an issue, so ensure that your bicycle is secured, and also
register your bike with the UF Police Department.
UF also provides an affordable bicycle rental program,
Gator Gears
, for students. Bicycles can be rented by semester, or annually.
RTS Bus System
Learn
More
Parking at UF
Learn
More
Bicycle Safety and Registration
Learn
More
Things to do around town
Cheering on the Gators is a huge part of becoming a member of the Gator Nation. The best part is that most sporting events are free for students!
Gainesville is home to many beautiful nature trails and state parks, including
Paynes Prarie,
that make for excellent opportunities to get outdoors and enjoy sunny Florida weather.
It also has a variety of cultural venues for you to explore. Founded over 40 years ago by UF graduates,
the Hippodrome
is located in historic Downtown Gainesville and continues to feature both plays and movies for every taste. If you’re interested in museums, visit
the Cade Museum of Creativity and Invention.
For art lovers, the annual Downtown Festival & Art Show is a must attend event.
Check out some fun things to do below:
Blue Springs State Park
Explore Blue
Springs
Gator athletics
Explore the Gator
sports
Depot Park
Explore Depot
Park
Grove Street Farmers Market
Learn more about  our farmers
market
The Hippodrome
Discover the
Hippodrome
St. Augustine Beach
Learn about St. Augustine
Beach