SOURCE: https://www.stoneridgegainesville.com/

WELCOME TO
Stoneridge Apartments of Gainesville
An important chapter of your life awaits at Stoneridge
Apartments. With our modern facilities, you can start your adult life on the
right foot. Whether we talk about layout features, increased comfort, or shared
spaces to gather around with your mates, you’re indeed signed up for an awesome
time. Want to find out what we offer at our student apartments in Gainesville,
FL? Contact us now!
AMENITIES
Modern
Living Starts
With Thoughtful Details
Can you imagine what it’s like to live in comfort while enjoying
university life to the fullest?  While
all of our apartments provide fully equipped kitchens, expansive patios or
balconies, and ceiling fans, select ones elevate your comfort with private
bathrooms, walk-in closets, and washer/dryer sets. No matter what, our
Gainesville, FL, student apartments offer you that helping hand at the start of
your journey.
View Amenities
PET FRIENDLY
POOL DECK
FITNESS CENTER
PACKAGE LOCKERS
For those who know how to choose
Choose Your Home
Sign your lease, pay your rent & move-in amount electronically
Resident Login
Login Opens in a new tab
NEIGHBORHOOD
Live near great
places to eat & shop
But the college experience isn’t all about classes, right? Nestled
in an energic city, you’ll be surrounded by endless opportunities to fill up
your free time. Want a healthy treat? Stop by Planet Smoothie. Want to have a
movie night? Regal Cinemas might be one of your go-tos. Want to explore nature?
Paynes Prairie Preserve State Park offers memorable sights. And there’s so much
more! Schedule a tour now to explore the ins and outs of our apartments for
rent in Gainesville, FL!
SHOPPING AREA
RESTAURANTS
TRANSPORTATION
Get Directions
Experience
Explore, dream, discover, & relax
Explore your future place with a virtual tour and imagine
where you’d set up your laptop for studying or your console for those fun
gaming sessions.
Virtual Tour
PHOTO GALLERY
You’ll love living
near the University of Florida
Our gallery is more than Instagrammable—you can see what
makes us stand out and what vibes we bring to the table. Neutral but welcoming
colors will greet you once you step inside, and our facilities will make you
feel just like home.
View Gallery
Ready to move in
Apply Now
Login Opens in a new tab